# Lab-Meter
<b>Arduino project - measuring lab conditions like temperature and humidity, featuring LC display and webserver upload</b>

This project consists of two parts: an Arduino-based module to measure temperature and humidity and sending these data to a webserver, plus a simple server-side php script to display and archive the measurements. It is similar to the <a href=https://github.com/DKR-HIPS/lcdmeter/>Lcd-Meter</a> project, but does not use a realtime clock module. It is using the built-in watchdog functionality of the Arduino board.

<b>Hardware:</b>
This project uses an Arduino-compatible board with Ethernet shield (e.g. Wiznet 5100 or 5500-type), a DHT22 temperature/humidity sensor, and a 16x2 LCD module. The latter is connected by I2C, while the Ethernet module uses SPI and the DHT22 sensor is connected via 1-wire protocol.

<b>Software:</b>
On the Arduino side the project implements mostly standard procedures to read from the sensor, output to the LCD and to create a simple web client in order to deliver the data to the webserver via HTTP GET requests. The Arduino code makes use of the libraries Wire.h, LiquidCrystal_I2C.h, DHT.h, SPI.h, Ethernet.h and wdt.h. On the server side the data are received by sensor.php and written into .csv files. Data can be viewed by navigating to index.php on the webserver. A few settings are available in settings.php and formatting is mostly specified in the style.css file. The demo system is desgined for simple use, in a real lab environment the data is typically written to a database instead. 

A demonstration website - which can also be used for initial test-driving when you have assembled your own device - is available here: https://mackrug.de/labmeter

## How to get started

<b>Hardware setup:</b> Attach the Ethernet shield to the Arduino board. Wire the LCD and sensor modules with +5V and GND. The I2C data wires from LCD module are connected to pins A4 (SDA) and A5 (SCL). In addition, the DHT22 sensor data pin is connected to Arduino pin 2, and a 10K resistor is needed as pull-up between this pin and +5V. Two buttons are optionally connected between Arduino pins 6 and 7 to GND.

<b>First startup:</b> Before uploading the program to the board using the Arduino IDE, make sure to configure the Ethernet MAC address (this has to be unique inside your network) and a static IP fallback address (this has to match your local network settings). Also give the device a unique numerical device ID (line: "int devnum=1"), in order to enable parallel operation of multiple such devices.

<b>Server side installation:</b> Create a new directory on your php-enabled webserver, e.g. "labmeter", and copy the four files index.php, sensor.php, settings.php and style.css into this directory. Also create two subfolders named "files" and "deleted". The first one will later contain the .csv files with incoming data, and deleted files will be moved to the second folder. Make sure that access permissions are set correctly, so that php can read/write the directories and files as needed. You can then use your measurements archive like in the example provided (https://mackrug.de/labmeter). Remove the "example" notice four your own version and change whatever you need to work differently.

<b>Operation:</b> A working serverpath and security code is pre-configured already for testing purposes. For your own permament setup, make up a new 8-digit security code and enter it into the Arduino program (char security[] = "...";) as well as in the settings.php on the server ($code = '...' ;). You could also adjust the interval for sending data to the server (default is ca. every 3 minutes), apply a positive or negative temperature correction value if needed, and set the times when the LCD backlight will autmatically switch on and off (default is 7 h and 23 h). The function of the two buttons is to manually trigger the sending of data (button on pin 6) and to toggle the LCD backlight on/off (button on pin 7). Note that the interval for reading new values from the sensor is 10 seconds, so that up-to-date values are always shown on the LCD. A small "arrow left" symbol will shortly blink in the top-right corner of the display whenever an actual measurement happens. The code activates the built-in watchdog functionality of the Arduino board (timeout 8 seconds), which is mainly meant to trigger a reboot in case of networking failures.

## Known issues

<b>Network connectivity:</b> In this project it is assumed that a stable network configuration is always available, so that the module can reach the webserver anytime using the DHCP-acquired or static IP address. That means, there is no particular network error handling in the code. If the network is not accessible, it may show "please wait" or "sending failed" and after the watchdog timeout is reached it will reboot and attempt to reconnect to the network. If you need constantly displaying messurements under unsafe network conditions, you will have to change the code and add error-handling to achieve this.

<b>Date/time:</b> Note that this project does not use a realtime clock module. Without a server connection the module cannot know the date and time. The date and time is delivered through the server response which includes a current date/time string. The sensor.php script simply responds with the current server date/time when it has received data. In case of invalid calls to the script it will return "|00:00:00|0000-00-00|" instead. That's also what the module shows if it could not connect to the server.

<b>Sensor accuracy:</b> The DHT22 sensor is specified for a precision of +/-0.5 °C. Please note, if you pack the hardware into a very compact case, that a small temperature increase inside the case which mainly comes from the Ethernet shield may cause the sensor to read unexpectedly higher values. Therefore, make sure that the sensor is placed outside and away from the case.

<b>Data storage:</b> A new .csv file is created for every day and files are not automatically deleted. Using the "delete" action will move them simply into the "deleted" folder - this is out of caution to not loose any measurements accidentially. Since the .csv files are very compact they are unlikely to fill-up webspace even after several years. However, if you want files to be deleted automatically after some time, you will have to add such functionality to the php scripts. In a lab setup, possibly using multiple devices, one would typically change the sensor.php script to write data to a database system instead, which is easy to achieve.
